2016-05-24-maintenance.md

Acquiring Skills Make You a Commodity
Developers usually prefer widely used technologies than in-house and company-specific technologies. Many developers are keen to technology trends and are excited if they can use such hot technologies in their job places.
Be careful if you are one of such developers. Learning about widely-used and trending technologies make you a commodity. If you sell experience on such technologies, you are selling yourself cheap. Your resume might say “I have experience in React, Angular, and server-side development in Node, SQL DBs, did DevOps work using AWS, Docker…” but that will not sell you expensive.
For widely-used technologies, there is a harsh competition globally. Just that you “experienced” such technologies, not matter how extensive the experience is, will not make you stand out. There are always other developers who have better experience than you, somewhere in the world. Especially, the originators of the technology, people who are already big contributors/committers to the technology, have significant advantage and will enjoy leverage as the technology becomes more popular. Do you think you can beat such people by just learning hard?
At the beginning, it is OK you just dive into a new technology and try to learn about it. That will give you a lot of insights, and sense in what a common problem the industry faces and the technology tries to resolve. However, if you only keep doing it, just learning, you only put yourself in a hard competition with no hope.
Then at some point, you need to be strategic. You should build up your own experience, which you can sell to others. Maybe you become an originator of a yet another technology or software product, probably derived from the one you learnt. Or you leverage existing technologies and create some new services. Being strategic is to avoid hopeless harsh competition.
Don’t misunderstand this. At the beginning, you need to be a commodity. You need to learn heard although you can never catch up to the level of the originator or existing leaders. After you get into a certain level, you start acting strategically and create your own experience.