---
layout: post
title:  "It Takes Long Time to Pay Back Technical Debt"
date:   2016-05-23 20:38:53 +0900
categories: jekyll update
---
# It Takes Long Time to Pay Back Technical Debt
Paying back technical debt comes with several different flavors. You clean up messy code by refactoring. You re-design your system and replace some components within the entire system. Also you might upgrade a system to a new version, supposedly with less flaws.

All these activities take time. You cannot do any of these in a very short period of time, no matter how hard you try to.

Contrarily, for financial debt, you can pay it back immediately. If you have enough cash, you can pay it back with no time. If you enough (floating) asset, you can sell the asset, gain cash in return, and still pay back the financial debt immediately.

For technical debt, you cannot use cash to pay it back. Maybe you think that if you have a lot of cash, you can hire more people temporarily to pay back technical debt. However, there is a known Brooks’ law which explains why it does not work that way. New people are new to the technical debt (software), and new to your business. It takes time for them to learn about it. Without learning about them, the new people can possibly mess up the code and add up crappy technical debt, while they are trying to paying back the debt. What about paying it back with other software asset? Software can never be floating asset, (i.e) so replacing software by other software, is tremendous effort.

One hypothesis I have, is that if you keep cleaning up technical debt as a long-running, committed project, probably it works. Although I don’t have a good support evidence for my hypothesis, I got the idea from QSM’s time vs. effort diagram.
[QSM Almanac 2016 — Economic Impact of Delaying Project Deadline](http://www.qsm.com/qsm/content-access?node=923&title=QSM%20Software%20Almanac:%202016%20Edition)
