Risk Hedge in Software Business, and Derivatives? | Software Investment Science
A long time ago, hedging risk in financial trading was also difficult. However, that was made much easier nowadays with Financial derivatives.
People often misunderstand Financial derivatives to be risky assets. However, the risky part of derivatives is from their “leverages”, but derivatives themselves are not necessarily risky. If used effectively, Financial derivatives reduce risk of your investment, and that’s actually one of the main purposes derivatives are created.
For example, in stock investment, if the entire stock market goes down, like Black Monday, your stock investment position will incur huge loss, even if you picked up a right company that outperforms its competitors.
1) The risk of thee entire market going down
is a different type of risk from
2) your selected company is actually poor, and lose against its competitors
As a thoughtful stock picker investor, you only want to face the risk 2) only, not 1). So the Finance industry came up with a type of derivative, stock index futures, to avoid the risk. You can buy a select stock, and to avoid the risk 1), you short the stock index futures.
Unfortunately in software business, there is no such derivative assets to hedge out its risks.
It is difficult to decompose a software project into different risk factors and re-pack them into a wide variety of derivative assets.
Maybe one day, clever investment bankers come up with good derivative assets for hedging in software business, which allows our lives much easier.
Until then, let’s focus on what we can do to manage risk of software, which we found and explored in the software industry.


Risk Hedge in Software Business? | Software Investment Science
In Finance, hedging is a very important way to get rid of risk. That is possible because you can easily buy and sell financial assets.
In contrast, software re-sell is usually impossible. When you buy a software product, or subscribe to a cloud-based service, you cannot re-sell it. The software licence prohibits re-sell in most of the cases.
Also, even if you are not restricted by licenses or contracts, your in-house and custom software you developed, cannot be sold as no one wants to buy it.
So to effectively hedge risk, buy and sell must be both easy, otherwise, you just need to take up the risk in your investment. That is making risk management of software difficult than trading financial assets.
Software projects are usually long-term, hard-to-replace, and hard-to-get-rid-of investment.