Pricing Software in Financial Arbitrage Context - Forms of buying software
Buying a software package

If you can find a software package that perfectly fits your needs, you can buy and install it to run your business. This is common for utility programs like office suite, or non-core business applications like ledger software. However, for core business software and applications, usually you cannot just buy a 3rd party package.

Buying a company as a whole - M&A

As discussed in the previous article Pricing Software in Financial Arbitrage Context - Intro, when you are buying software which was built and used internally in another company, you will most likely need to buy the whole company.


Image by zirconicusso at FreeDigitalPhotos.net
Invest in a software project

This is a very time consuming approach. However, still most of core-business software in many companies are built internally, as it needs to satisfy their own needs.

Today, even if you decide to create your software from scratch, you don't really do it from the ground up. Most likely you take advantage of Open Source Software, OSS. For example, you might build up front-end user interface in web applications in React or Angular JS. Then on the backend, you might use MySQL for data storage, Chef for infrastructure management, etc.


Outsource software development
This approach is similar to the above "Invest in a software project" approach. There are a different ways to develop software outsourcing the resources. You can ask everything to a system vendor to develop software for you, partially leverage vendors for some part of your system, or employ vendor developers as consultants for a given period of time, etc.

Cloud Subscription

Images by stockimages and renjith krishnan at FreeDigitalPhotos.net
This is becoming more and more popular and important option recently. Due to explosive rise of cloud-based services, even for core businesses, companies started integration with cloud-based services offered by 3rd parties. Usually, companies build internal systems which talk to 3rd party cloud-based services via APIs, or use web-based user interface or client application to access the services.

A commonly used example is GitHub. Companies often set up repositories there, and use its web pages to make pull requests, manage issues, etc. Also GitHub's WebHook can call other services, even other cloud services like CircleCI or Jenkins build processes to automate the software build procedure.



Pricing Software in Financial Arbitrage Context - Forms of selling software
Selling software is nearly impossible
As in Pricing Software in Financial Arbitrage Context - Intro, you cannot sell your software other than the below M&A case where you ser selling your entire company. This makes it very hard to construct an arbitrage argument.

Selling the company - the only pure form of sell

This is the only pure for of selling, although you are not selling the software only but the entire business, company.

Retire the software

Image by Surachai at FreeDigitalPhotos.net
For some cases, you probably want to just stop using and maintaining your software. When you are retiring the software, you can assume you are selling it at zero price, and getting rid of maintenance and investment. Of course revenues generated from the software will also be gone.

Chances are like you stop doing unprofitable business, and then the underlying software is no longer needed. You might make this retirement decision when maintenance cost is higher than the revenue it generates.

Replace the software you are using, with a new one

Images by Witthaya Phonsawat and stockimages at FreeDigitalPhotos.net
A more common case than pure retirement is replacing the current software with a newly built one. Possibly you are only replacing part of your entire software system, like replacing the middleware layer for better scalability etc.

This is actually a difficult investment decision, than most people think of. The new software does not generate any revenue during the development phase, until it actually replaces the old one. Also once the new software runs in production, it has much higher possibility of unknown bugs and issues.

Special case - set up a competitor company
This is a special case which you are not actually selling software even at the zero price.

When you notice a certain company, has a very high maintenance cost in their software, you can set up a new company running a competing service with them. Supposedly you have much lower maintenance cost in your own software, so that you can provide more attractive prices offering the similar service.


Image by zirconicusso at FreeDigitalPhotos.net
From the selling and buying discussion perspective, it is 1) buying (investing in) your own software which is similar to the rival company, 2) and then take take the revenue out of your rival.

So, you are not actually selling anything, but taking advantage of mis-priced (too high maintenance cost) of the software your rival had.


Software Buy & Sell forms, Packaged Software and Cloud Subscription
Buying and Selling software come in different forms, so let's review cases of buying a packaged software, or subscribe to a cloud service

Classification of buy & sell activities of software is important to understand market mechanism
Sorry, I did mis-classification of software buy & sell... In previous articles, I wrongly classified buying and selling forms of software.

Pricing Software in Financial Arbitrage Context - Forms of buying software
Pricing Software in Financial Arbitrage Context - Forms of selling software
They should have been simpler and more intuitive.
Correct understanding of buy & sell forms is important to discuss about software market mechanism - competition, efficiency, and arbitrage opportunities. So, let's review them below, and in next few articles.

Buying a packaged software product
The most intuitive form of buying a software product. You purchase a physical solid package (CD, DVD), or download the package.


Buyer: who purchases software
Seller: Software vendor, Agency seller
Cloud subscription
Recently, it is increasingly becoming more common to subscribe to cloud-based software products. The main difference between cloud subscription and package download is that the cloud-based software, software runs in the cloud, not on your PC.


Images by stockimages and renjith krishnan at FreeDigitalPhotos.net
Buyer: subscriber
Seller: cloud service provider
Open source software ... it is not actually sold though
Open source software is not sold anywhere actually. As the name says, you can just use it for free. However, to understand the market mechanism of software, you can regard Open source software as a software product sold at zero price.

Buyer: Open source software user
Seller: Open source software community
Conclusion - again the classification is to correctly understand the market mechanism of software
These probably looked pretty obvious, no need for discussion? Maybe, but correct classification of buy & sell is important to understand the market mechanism.

With correct understanding of the software market mechanism, we can quantify the economic impact of software-related activities, and apply Financial Engineering theories for further analysis.

Let's discuss those topics in future articles, but for now we continue on the forms of buy sell in the next few articles.


Software Development and M&A, long-term investment in software
When you cannot find read-made software satisfying your needs, you make a long-term investment to develop custom software, or buy another company as a whole to take over their business and software assets.

Continued from the previous article, let's look into other forms of buying and selling software. Here are long-term investment buy & sell forms.

In-house Software Development is a long-term investment

For your business core purposes, it is common that you cannot find any software product or cloud service which "exactly" matches what you need.

It is typical for your business-core software, and you develop your business-core software within your company. Such a case is obviously a long term investment

Buyer: company's business users
Seller: same company's developer team
Software Development is also possible by asking external software vendors
Similar to the above self-development case, you can ask a software vendor, like Accenture, to build the software product/system for you.

Buyer: company
Seller: software vendor
M&A, although it is not buying software only but the business as a whole

Another form of long-term investment is Merger and Acquisition, M&A.

You don't do M&A to buy software, but to buy the business as a whole. However, as a result, you will get target company's software asset.

Buyer: external investor
Seller: existing share holders

Image by zirconicusso at FreeDigitalPhotos.net
Long term investment, more uncertainty (i.e.) more risk
As these forms are long term investment, there is more uncertainty involved (e.g.):

When the development finishes?
Does the developed software satisfies your need, has good quality?
M&A might fail - you fail to buy enough shares
Acquired company's accounting fraud
etc
In a Financial sense, uncertainty = risk. So you need to anticipate larger potential loss from such forms of long term investment.
Conclusion: Software buy & sell transactions come in different flavors
Buying and selling software products can be different from buying and selling consumer goods like milk, apples, books etc. You don't usually ask farmers to provider milk for you, or an author to write a book for you.

Only investors would do so - ask farmers and ask authors (for books, investor = publisher though) - but in the software industry, quite often we see investments are made.

As it is an investment, investors need to be really aware of risks inherent these buy & sell transactions.